Document snap confinement (#46)
canonical/ubuntu-security-documentation: docs/security-features/privilege-restriction/snap-confinement.rst

Declaring interfaces in the snap allows the default AppArmor profile to be extended.
`This default profile <https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/8105ec1a7395c7a0c0126a4fff66a063d326c3f1/interfaces/apparmor/template.go#L63>`_ defines a common set of rules that are applied to all snaps by default.
For example, when a snap plugs the camera interface, `this profile <https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/8105ec1a7395c7a0c0126a4fff66a063d326c3f1/interfaces/builtin/camera.go#L32>`_ is added to extend the default policy.
Whenever an interface is connected or disconnected from a snap, the Apparmor profiles are regenerated for that snap.

See :doc:`apparmor` for more details.

Seccomp
-------

Similarly to how AppArmor is used for snaps, Seccomp filters are also generated by snapd for each app in a snap.
These allow for processes inside the snap to have syscall filtering. Again, these can be extended through the use of snap interfaces.
Whenever an interface is connected or disconnected from a snap, the Seccomp filters are regenerated for that snap.

See :any:`seccomp-filtering` for more details.

Device cgroups

> --------------
> 
> For snaps using bases ``core24`` and later, cgroups are only used by snapd to manage access to device files through the `device controller <https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html#device-controller>`_ mechanism.
> The device controller is implemented as a BPF program of type ``BPF_PROG_TYPE_CGROUP_DEVICE`` and is attached to the cgroup.
> Prior to ``core24``, access to device files is managed using `device filtering <https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/devices.html>`_.
> Device filtering is only added when udev tags any devices for that snap.
> This is determined by the interfaces used by a snap (e.g `custom-device <https://snapcraft.io/docs/custom-device-interface>`_).
> Udev rules are generated in ``/etc/udev/rules.d/70-snap...`` and tags are added to the devices (hardware) associated with the use of this interface.
> If a snap has tagged devices, a cgroup is created in ``/sys/fs/cgroup/devices/`` to allow access to these devices and other common devices (e.g `/dev/null`).
> Whenever an interface is connected or disconnected from a snap, the device cgroups are regenerated for that snap.

Reviewer: I think I would tweak the whole section.

```suggestion
Device access control
--------------

Device access control is implemented using mechanisms provided by control groups.
The sandbox configures device access filers, such that only permitted devices can be accessed by the snap application.

The exact implementation is chosen at runtime depending on whether the host kernel supports `cgroup v2 <https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html#device-controller>`_ or
`cgroup v1 <https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/devices.html>`_.
When using  ``cgroup v2``, the sandbox attaches a eBPF device filter program  to the unique
control group, in the context of which, the snap application is being executed. Whereas, when
using  ``cgroup v1``, the sandbox creates a unique group under the device controller hierarchy
and moves the application process to that group.

Devices are assigned to snaps as a result of interface connections. Snapd generates udev rules
at ``/etc/udev/rules.d/70-snap.<per-snap-tag>.rules`` that assign a unique, snap specific tag
to every device logically permitted by a given connected interface.

For snaps using bases ``core24`` and later, every snap application is configured with device
access control filters during startup. Snaps using ``core22`` and earlier bases, are only configured
with device access control if any devices have been assigned for the snap through interface
connections.

Access to the following devices is always allowed:
* /dev/null
* /dev/zero
* /dev/full
* /dev/random
* /dev/urandom
* /dev/tty
* /dev/console
* /dev/ptmx & PTY

Whenever an interface is connected or disconnected from a snap, udev rules are regenerated
and reloaded for that snap. Udev integration helper ensures that active sandboxes are updated.
```

@zyga can you take a look as well?

^^^^^^^^^^

In order to gain access to certain resources on the host system, snap interfaces are used.
Interfaces enable resources from one snap to be shared with another and with the system.

See `Interfaces <https://snapcraft.io/docs/interfaces>`_ for more details.

Classic
-------

Classic confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: classic``.
This level of confinement allows access to the system’s resources in much the same way traditional packages do. Because of this, manual review is required to publish this type of snap.

Devmode
-------

Devmode confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: devmode``.
This level of confinement is used during the development of snaps. 
Devmode runs snaps similarly to strictly confined snaps, however, instead of limiting access to the host system resources, it produces a debug output to enable developers to identify what access or interfaces may be needed for the snap to run as strictly confined.

Confinement Mechanisms
######################

AppArmor
--------

AppArmor profiles are generated for each command in a snap and are used to restrict or allow certain capabilities for each command.

> Declaring interfaces in the snap allows the default AppArmor to be extended.

Reviewer 2: "the default AppArmor to be extended" -> missing the word "profile" :-)

I would also suggest adding a short sentence about the existence of a default AA profile, along with example of typical things it covers.

For example, when a snap plugs the camera interface, `this profile <https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/master/interfaces/builtin/camera.go#L32>`_ is added to the default policy.

See :doc:`apparmor` for more details.

Seccomp
-------

Similarly to how AppArmor is used for snaps, Seccomp filters are also generated for each command in a snap.

> These allow for processes inside the snap to have syscall filtering. Again, these can be extended through the use of snap interfaces.

Reviewer 2: Link to seccomp docs (https://documentation.ubuntu.com/security/docs/security-features/privilege-restriction/#seccomp-filtering)

> Device cgroups

Reviewer 2: I would suggest a slight expansion of this section, to explain the interaction between udev rules and cgroups. I would also be useful to clarify where the cgroup that snap processes are added to fit in the cgroup hierarchy and when the cgroups are actually created and torn down. The "no devices are tagged" bit seems to use terminology not previously introduced (what does tagging mean?). The definitive article "The device cgroup is not used" is a bit strange, suggesting a particular cgroup.

Also, when merged, this should link to cgroups docs: https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-security-documentation/pull/45

Reviewer 3: I'm less familiar with this part so it might be worth asking snapd folks.

AFAIK snaps only use devices cgroups. Similar to apparmor profiles and seccomp filers, snapd generates udev rules based on the connected interfaces (see /etc/udev/rules.d). This rules are used to TAG devices that match certain criteria (TAGs identify snap apps that are allowed to use the device, i.e. TAG=snap_snap-name_snap-app). Then, during the (snap) application start up, snap-confine adds the required devices to the cgroup based on these TAGs. 

> Are all processes from one snap in the same cgroup? Are processes from different snaps in different cgroups?

I think different applications defined in the same snap will use different cgroups (as they may define different plugs/slots, what should render in different sets of allowed devices). Different instances/process running the same snap app may use the same cgroup (I don't really know), however it should be ok if only devices cgroups are used.

Reviewer: Cgroups have something called device controller, https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html#device-controller which is the thing we use. With, now legacy, cgorup v1 there was a separate hierarchy, which snap-confine added directories to. With the currently used cgroups v2, the actual hierarchy is managed by systemd, both the system one, and the user session one (for non daemon applications we request systemd to create a dedicated scope).

For snaps using `core`, `core18`, `core20`, `core22`, `bare` bases, device filtering is added only when udev tagged any devices for that snap. Snaps using base `core24` and later, are always set up with a device controller.

The device controller is implemented as a BPF program of type `BPF_PROG_TYPE_CGROUP_DEVICE` attached to the cgroup.

There are multiple levels of snap confinement for snaps:

* Strict
* Classic 
* Devmode

See `Snap Confinement <https://snapcraft.io/docs/snap-confinement#p-29237-confinement-levels>`_ for more details.

In order to achieve confinement, snaps utilise multiple Linux isolation and confinement mechanisms. These are:

* AppArmor
* Seccomp
* Device cgroups
* Traditional permissions 

See `Confinement and isolation mechanisms <https://snapcraft.io/docs/security-policies#p-2741-confinement-and-isolation-mechanisms>`_ for more details.

Confinement Types 
#################

Strict
------

Strict confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: strict``.
This level of confinement utilises all of the confinement mechanisms listed above to ensure the snap executables and data are sandboxed, with limited access.

Interfaces
^^^^^^^^^^

In order to gain access to certain resources on the host system, snap interfaces are used.

> Interfaces enable resources from one snap to be shared with another and with the system.

Reviewer 3: Maybe you can add that interfaces are composed by:
- slots: used by snaps or the system (implicit slot) to expose resources
- plugs: used by snaps to consume access resources exposed by a slot

See `Interfaces <https://snapcraft.io/docs/interfaces>`_ for more details.

Classic
-------

Classic confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: classic``.
This level of confinement allows access to the system’s resources in much the same way traditional packages do. Because of this, manual review is required to publish this type of snap.

Devmode
-------

Devmode confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: devmode``.
This level of confinement is used during the development of snaps. 
Devmode runs snaps similarly to strictly confined snaps, however, instead of limiting access to the host system resources, it produces a debug output to enable developers to identify what access or interfaces may be needed for the snap to run as strictly confined.

> Confinement Mechanisms

Author: just added it in, let me know if I missed any details!

######################

AppArmor
--------

> AppArmor profiles are generated for each command in a snap and are used to restrict or allow certain capabilities for each command.

Reviewer 3: Maybe worth stating that snapd generates these profiles

Snap Confinement
================

> A snap’s confinement level controls the degree of isolation it has from the user’s system. Application developers or packagers can adjust the confinement level to specify in broad terms how much access to system resources an application needs, either for normal use or during development.

Reviewer 2: This is indeed still pending, but not a show-stopper.

There are multiple levels of snap confinement for snaps:

* Strict
* Classic 
* Devmode

See `Snap Confinement <https://snapcraft.io/docs/snap-confinement#p-29237-confinement-levels>`_ for more details.

In order to achieve confinement, snaps utilise multiple Linux isolation and confinement mechanisms. These are:

* AppArmor
* Seccomp
* Device cgroups
* Traditional permissions and Mount namespaces

See `Confinement and isolation mechanisms <https://snapcraft.io/docs/security-policies#p-2741-confinement-and-isolation-mechanisms>`_ for more details.

Confinement Types 
#################

Strict
------

Strict confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: strict``.
This level of confinement utilises all of the confinement mechanisms listed above to ensure the snap executables and data are sandboxed, with limited access.

Interfaces
^^^^^^^^^^

In order to gain access to certain resources on the host system, snap interfaces are used.
Interfaces enable resources from one snap to be shared with another and with the system.
Interfaces are composed by:

* slots: used by snaps or the system (implicit slot) to expose resources

> * plugs: used by snaps to consume access resources exposed by a slot

Reviewer 3: > Would it be worth adding a bit about auto-connecting versus manually connecting interfaces?

Maybe yes, also privileged vs super-privileged

See `Interfaces <https://snapcraft.io/docs/interfaces>`_ for more details.

Classic
-------

Classic confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: classic``.

> This level of confinement allows access to the system’s resources in much the same way traditional packages do. Because of this, manual review is required to publish this type of snap.

Reviewer 2: If that's the case, we should be clear on that.

It is important to note that ``classic`` snaps **do not** run on Ubuntu core systems.

Devmode
-------

Devmode confinement is declared in a snapcraft.yaml through ``confinement: devmode``.
This level of confinement is used during the development of snaps. 
Devmode runs snaps similarly to strictly confined snaps, however, instead of limiting access to the host system resources, it produces a debug output to enable developers to identify what access or interfaces may be needed for the snap to run as strictly confined.

Confinement Mechanisms
######################

AppArmor
--------

> AppArmor profiles are generated by snapd for each command in a snap and are used to restrict or allow certain capabilities for each command.

Reviewer 3: It would be better to use app, as each (snap) command and service will have a different apparmor profile (See Related to https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-security-documentation/pull/46/files#r2262529895)

Effectively, each snap command might be different invocation of the same executable (just defining a minimum set of arguments)

> AppArmor profiles are generated by snapd for each command in a snap and are used to restrict or allow certain capabilities for each command.

Reviewer 3: whilst we don't have network mediation via apparmor yet, network access is prevented if no network interfaces is connected

https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/master/interfaces/builtin/network.go#L37

Declaring interfaces in the snap allows the default AppArmor profile to be extended.

> `This default profile <https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/master/interfaces/apparmor/template.go#L63_>`_ defines a common set of rules that are applied to all bases by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`This default profile <https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/master/interfaces/apparmor/template.go#L63_>`_ defines a common set of rules that are applied to all snaps by default.
```?

For example, when a snap plugs the camera interface, `this profile <https://github.com/canonical/snapd/blob/master/interfaces/builtin/camera.go#L32>`_ is added to extend the default policy.

See :doc:`apparmor` for more details.

Seccomp
-------

Similarly to how AppArmor is used for snaps, Seccomp filters are also generated for each command in a snap.
These allow for processes inside the snap to have syscall filtering. Again, these can be extended through the use of snap interfaces.

See :any:`seccomp-filtering` for more details.

Device cgroups
--------------

> Cgroups are used in snaps to resource limit processes running inside the snap.

Reviewer: resources are usually understood as CPU, RAM, IO. This should likely state that the sandbox is using device controller only.

There is such a thing called quotas in snapd, but it's not part of the sandbox setup, but rather just a think we configure in systemd and only applies to services (apps with `daemon: ..`).

Udev rules are generated for each command in a snap.
``snapd`` determines whether a device cgroup is used depending on the interfaces used by a snap.
When an interface is used by a snap and that interface uses the udev backend, rules are generated in ``/etc/udev/rules.d/70-snap...`` and tags are added to the devices (hardware) associated with the use of this interface.
If a snap has tagged devices, a cgroup is created in ``/sys/fs/cgroup/devices/`` to allow access to these devices and other common devices (e.g `/dev/null`).

See :doc:`cgroups` for more details.

Traditional permissions and Mount namespaces
--------------------------------------

> Processes inside the snap that try to access resources are restricted by the typical file permissions on the system (owner, group, file ACLs, etc).

Reviewer 2: That is indeed interesting! Would be interesting to understand what happens with the credentials of the invoking process.

> Processes inside the snap that try to access resources are restricted by the typical file permissions on the system (owner, group, file ACLs, etc).

Author: just waiting to see if we have any other docs on snap-confine before updating this bit
